# CMSC471-FP
Final project for CMSC471: Data Visualization <br>
Co-authored by Aman Srivastava and Tanvi Panse

We created Hot Zones to visualize the distribution of 1.88 million wildfires across the United States. It combines a variety of views to uncover patterns in the wildfire size, cause, and location. The goal of this project is to allow users to understand the true scale of the wildfire problem within the U.S., then provide a way for target solutions to be innovated. When it came to narrativization, our inspiration came from Harry Stevens’ simulitis visualizations: https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2020/world/corona-simulator/.  

We began by loading the dataset from Kaggle: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rtatman/188-million-us-wildfires/data, but quickly realized that it was simply too large, and would continuously crash. Therefore, we decided that the best course of action was to take a stratified sample of the dataset, so that we could still present the relationships as accurately as possible, while not causing our server to repeatedly crash. Tanvi wrote a Python script that took a stratified 50% sample of the Kaggle dataset, and used that as the modified dataset, thus still covering ~1 million fires over 30 years. We used the fields that were most relevant to us, such as FIRE_YEAR, STATE, LAT/LONG, FIRE_SIZE, and STAT_CAUSE_DESCR. In order to plot the map, we used the us-states-d3.json TopoJSON, along with the built-in geoAlbers projection function. 

Tanvi implemented a map of the wildfires, but originally plotted all the wildfires from all the years at once. She color-coded and sized the plot points to emphasize size/severity(acres burned). Green corresponded to fires under 100 acres, yellow corresponded to fires between 100 and 750 acres, red corresponded to fires between 750 and 50,0000 acres, and black corresponded to fires that burned greater than 50,000 acres. This scaling was based on a quick Google search to determine how fires are typically classified by size. We added more specificity towards the larger end, because we realized we wanted to truly highlight when a fire was very large. The circles were sized based on a log scale that Tanvi created, making sure they never got too big that users were only able to focus on those extremely large circles. 

However, we quickly realized that we wanted to improve the readability and interactivity of the visualization, so Aman added a time slider, so that users can see the fires plotted per year. This allowed users to cleanly see fires occurring over time, without too much on the map at once. Later, he added a bar chart for specific years to represent the categorical fire causes, and their impact on the number of fires occurring within a year. The decision to make the bars orange came from a desire to uphold the fire motif, while not making it extremely in your face with a bright red, per se. He later implemented an animation to tie the two visualizations together, so that users can watch the spread of fires across the U.S. over time, while also watching the prominence of all the causes. 

Later on, we realized that both of these visualizations do a great job of painting a picture of the problem we want to solve, but no real way to tie things together for a solution. That is where we came up with the idea of a heatmap by cause and state. Aman implemented the heatmap with a color intensity encoding to demonstrate high/low fire count by state for the selected cause and year. This was arguably the most important visualization of our project, as it allows for solution generating, and targeted problem solving by region. The heatmap is displayed only if a cause is selected because it is only relevant by cause + year. 

Meanwhile, as Aman finished up this final visualization, Tanvi weaved in the storyline surrounding the visualization, with non-bulky text displayed alongside our graphs and plots. They allow the user to follow the story behind our decisions and the problem + potential solutions at hand. 

